Sam - Balcaskie estateFarm and estate factorWorked there for 8 years. Previously in a farm near Dunbar (across the firth of forth)Duties:What ever comes up.I look after: buildings, housing, histories parts of the estate, woodland, integrating with the community.I make it up as I go along.When I arrived the estate was broken up, we had to bring 11 farms back into one. We restored the infrastructure. Brought the veins of the farm back. Roads, water, fencing etc. Environmental works, the field veins.hedgerows create shelter for wildlife but also for the crops.We re-introduced 37km of hedgerow.The housing on the estate was poor, needed to be upgraded. We doubled the woodland. We brought in 3 biomass boilers in 2012. We use grain waste, chaff etc. This powers the offices and some other work spaces. We opened a nursery (for kids) called Little Farmers, my wife runs that. Balcaskie house is powered by a wood chip burner, the fuel comes from our management of the woodland.We have CCTV in the fuel hoppers, I can connect to that from my phone, need to use the broadband for that as the GSM is not good enough. the system emails and texts me if there is a problem.It tells me if the pump is not working etc.the grain drier uses kerosene. We got a Lithuanian guy to create a panel to monitor sends me the info i want/need (detail).I check it every hour to see how its doing. This is only at harvest time.The drier has to be very accurate, different grains need more or less drying (from different fields)The combine harvester also has a lot of sensors.At Easter Kellie we have the state office. See the map------the coastal land is best for crops, the inland fields are more suited to livestock.We're one of the biggest farms in the area.Other farms have more housing.Toby's uncle (who previously owned the farm) didn't do much, just rented out the fields. The farm was not profitable, we needed a team and equipment to make things happen.I live at East Kellie.the farming is all set-up. And after that wanted to allow local people to be able use parts of our estate to make an income, as the farming is not labour intensive. You could open a factory, but that would be miserable work. So we have people that needed workspaces. We opened the nursery in a building near our house, we could have  made it into another house, but didn't want such close neighbours. So the nursery was the best option. The farmworkers send their kids there, and other local people. It's nice for them being in the country.When I got here I asked the workers "where do you shop?""Where is your community?"We've been trying to make the place more of a community.We've started to engage more with the seaside of the local area. We have a guy making creels here. The land and sea don't talk. ProduceIt all goes outWinter wheat for distillingBarley for brewingOil seed rape for vegetable oilThere is DiAggio bottling plant nearby, they buy as much as they can to make generic spirit for turning into vodka and gin. We've started growing milling wheat, a local baker has asked for it. But small quantity milling is hard, big millers can't guarantee that what you give them is what you'll get back.We had to send it to a water mill in Blair Athol (xx miles away)We had to work out how to do it in 50kg bags as they have na old system. Our guys like taking it up there as they get a good lunch from the mill.We're trying to make people proud of what we do here. All out meat goes to the west of Scotland, to an abattoir. We want to sell meat locally, but at the moment it has to go to Glasgow and back. No-one wants to build new abattoirs. They are costly. The trouble is when you send a cow to the big ones, you're not sure what you sent is what you get back. There is always a discrepancy. Also we don't get quality cuts, that takes expert butchery.The front half goes to McDonalds, the back half M&SBut this is a low value method.there is another local farm who want to do it in a better way so we hope to partner with them. Tracking the meat, they all have tags and barcodes. We produce lots of speciality produce (preserves etc) but don't really have an outlet for that. When we grow broccoli 30% is sold and 70% gets ploughed back into the soil, supermarkets want what they want at the time they want it. It's not a very efficient way to work.Tech and OrganicOrganic meat production is easy.GPS on all our machines. It's very important.Machines check Nitrogen, lime, PH etcAll get mapped into a spreadsheet.The livestock are all tagged. RFID, we register their weight, what meds they've had etc. They get checked at 200 and 400 days, the government pays us for that data. Antibiotics have to change.We will have to start to use iodine etc for cuts/injuries on the animals.Sheep get lame, because they are genetically crap. They can be put out onto land thats no good for anything than grass. When you buy meat in the supermarket, the code will tell you the slaughterhouse, what farm etc. A national system.Bio Diversity 50 years ago there was much more biodiversity. But we got better and better at making more and more lower cost food. Everytime we spray the crop we disrupt it.Toby is looking at the very long termNitrogen looks for weaker plants, you need to use more weedkiller etc. Our chemical use need to go up.Weeds have developed resistance. People want cheap food, no-one every asks "make it more expensive"We want to do something different.Quality is taste plus other factors, needs a story.We've stopped spraying field margins.The barn owl population is rising, and the field mice. Healthy signs. We've hired a marketing person to explore new outlets.We bought a local pub, thats going to make us get our beef in there!We produce about 300 cattle a year, but we'll always have to sell most to the big producers.Day in the lifeCheck the emails, issues etc, look at the CCTV.Lots of calls with lots of people, need to see whats up, gather all the info. Lots of problem solving. Need top talk to builders, tradesmen.I'm in contact with as many people as I can, when the network allows!It's so frustrating getting hold of peopleThe great thing about the 2-way radio is that everyone can hear the conversation. yesterday it took 6 calls to get a water pipe fixed. Had to use SMS in the end.I'd like a booster.later I need silence, I need to get on with stuff, I have little un-connected shed. In the afternoons I gather all the info from the fields, I check it and double check it. Info from machines, ergonomists, vets etcI need to look objectivity at the info.We have lots of sensors on the machines and have a little weather station. When the machines go wrong the manufacturers can tell what wrong and where the machine is. So they can fix them easily. My neighbour has sensors for gas levels in the polytunnels. Can check ripeness etc. You need a humidified cold-store to keep produce fresh. You can only get certain crop species now, its not worth the big companies producing a large variety. We're looking at getting Riband, an old winter wheat, it's difficult to buy. We have dwarf cereals, we don't need the straw anymore, but the weeds thrive in that kind of crop.We spend a lot of time trying to stop it growing too fast. With the organic change we'll want to find older varieties. Yield is the least important factor. Our spring barley is Golden Promise, developed in the 70s. We don't use genetically modified, but I see it as just another technology. The concern is its all about the profit for the manufacturers. Barley is followed by rape, and then followed by wheatIt's all about a good what crop.